# -*- text -*-
PRIMARY AUTHORS AND MAJOR CONTRIBUTORS TO AM_UTILS:

Original authors of amd were the Berkeley team and especially Jan-Simon
Pendry.  Since then many people have contributed patches.

This file lists the ones who contributed major code changes, and I thank
them all.  This is of course not to diminish the smaller contributes of the
many others.  Thank you all.

* Erez Zadok <ezk@cs.columbia.edu>

The most significant changes were made by Erez Zadok in terms of bug fixes,
ports, and new features added.  Erez Zadok is the current maintainer of
am-utils, as of January 1997.

There is a mailing list dedicated to developers of am-utils.  To subscribe
to it, send mail to majordomo@majordomo.cs.columbia.edu, with the body of
the message having the single line "subscribe amd-dev".

* Randall S. Winchester <rsw@glue.umd.edu>

May 7, 1997: contributed a special version of upl102 that included NFS V.3
support.  Some of the code was contributed by Christos Zoulas
<christos@deshaw.com>.  I (Erez) ported these changes to am-utils.

September 12, 1997: lots of small prototype cleanups and fixes to numerous
files.

* Hannes Reinecke <hare@MathI.UNI-Heidelberg.DE>

Back in 1995, contributed code for linux.  A new parser for file system
specific options that only exist under linux.

* Leif Johansson <leifj@matematik.su.se>

June 22, 1997: minor patch to ensure that systems without an RE library work.

June 23, 1997: mount options should be properly comma limited.

July 10, 1997: info_ldap.c and prototype changes to all map _init and _mtime
functions.  Contributed scripts/amd2ldif.pl.

August 4, 1997: info_ldap.c fixes and adding two new amd.conf ldap
variables: ldap_cache_seconds and ldap_cache_maxmem.

* Andreas Stolcke <stolcke@speech.sri.com>

June 22, 1997: patches to ensure that proto= and vers= options work
properly in mount tables and can be overridden.  Later on, more code
contribued to optimize the best combination of proto/vers.

July 4, 1997: patches to get NFS V.3 working under irix5.

September 9, 1997: initialize all fields of mntent_t structures to 0.

* Danny Braniss <danny@cs.huji.ac.il>

July, 6 1997: contributed patches to hesiod on bsdi3.

* Tom Schmidt <tschmidt@micron.com>

July 10, 1997: Recommdation to include libgdbm if libc has no dbm_open.
Patches for netgrp(host) command.  Mods to aux/config.guess to recognize
sun3.

* Daniel S. Riley  <dsr@mail.lns.cornell.edu>

July 11, 1997: fixes to DU-4.0 to support string POSIX.1 signals, and struct
sockaddr with sa_len field.

July 13, 1997: Move amd.conf parsing to before switch_option() on log/debug
options.  Minor type wrt "ro" option in libamu/mount_fs.c.  Added more
fillers of mnttab options, for acdirmax, acdirmin, acregmax, acregmin, noac,
grpid, nosuid, and actimo.

* Roman Hodek <Roman.Hodek@informatik.uni-erlangen.de>

July 23, 1997: Got lots of patches from the Debian Linux folks, who fixed
several generic bugs, and one serious one for Linux.  The latter involved
using connected sockets for NFS mounts on kernels 1.3.10 and older.  Roman's
work is baed on amd-upl102, and work from Ian Murdock <imurdock@debian.org>
and Dominik Kubla <dominik@debian.org>.

* Rainer Orth <ro@TechFak.Uni-Bielefeld.DE>

August 6, 1997: assorted fixes to support hesiod-1.3, solaris 2.4 (which I
already fixed but did not release yet), and support for $LDFLAGS at
configure/compile time.

* Jason Thorpe <thorpej@nas.nasa.gov>

August 25, 1997: make amd work when talking to NIS+ servers in NIS
compatibility mode.  Fix originally came from Matthieu Herrb
<matthieu@laas.fr>.

* Chris Metcalf <metcalf@catfish.lcs.mit.edu>

August 29, 1997: patch to make amd use FQHN for NFS/RPC authentication,
useful esp. for cross-domain NFS mounts.
September 2, 1997: if plock() succeeded, don't display errno string.

* Enami Tsugutomo <enami@cv.sony.co.jp>

September 4, 1997: don't ping remote servers with NFS V.3 always, but V.2,
regardless of client's NFS version. (conf/transp/transp_sockets.c)

* Dan Riley <dsr@mail.lns.cornell.edu>

September 19, 1997: make sure that amd works with more secure portmappers
that do not allow forwarding of RPC messages to other services.

* Wolfgang Rupprecht <wolfgang@wsrcc.com>

August 10, 1997: netbsd and other bsd systems have a mask flag for
pcfs_args (msdos mount).

* Christos Zoulas <christos@deshaw.com>

September 25, 1997: fix to initialize uid/gid fields of pcfs_args_t on
netbsd.
