(c) 1995-2004 MindView, Inc.  All rights reserved.
Source code file from the book
"Thinking in C++, 2nd Edition, Volume 2."

The following permissions are granted respecting the
computer source code, which is contained in this file:

Permission is granted to classroom educators to use this
file as part of instructional materials prepared for
classes personally taught or supervised by the educator who
uses this permission, provided that (a) the book "Thinking
in C++" is cited as the origin on each page or slide that
contains any part of this file, and (b) that you may not
remove the above copyright legend nor this notice. This
permission extends to handouts, slides and other
presentation materials.

For purposes that do not include the publication or
presentation of educational or instructional materials,
permission also is granted to computer program designers
and programmers, and to their employers and customers, (a)
to use and modify this file for the purpose of creating
executable computer software, and (b) to distribute
resulting computer programs in binary form only, provided
that (c) you may not remove the above copyright legend nor
this notice from retained source code copies of this file,
and (d) each copy distributed in binary form has embedded
within it the above copyright notice.

Apart from the permissions granted above, the sole
authorized distribution point for additional copies of this
file is http://www.MindView.net (and official mirror sites)
where it is available, subject to the permissions and
restrictions set forth herein.

The following are clarifications of the limited permissions
granted above:

1. You may not publish or distribute originals or
modified versions of the source code to the software other
than in classroom situations described above.

2. You may not use the software file or portions
thereof in printed media without the express permission of
the copyright owner.

The copyright owner and author or authors make no
representation about the suitability of this software for
any purpose.  It is provided "as is," and all express,
implied, and statutory warranties and conditions of any
kind including any warranties and conditions of
merchantability, satisfactory quality, security, fitness
for a particular purpose and non-infringement, are
disclaimed. The entire risk as to the quality and
performance of the software is with you.

In no event will the authors or the publisher be liable for
any lost revenue, savings, or data, or for direct,
indirect, special, consequential, incidental, exemplary or
punitive damages, however caused and regardless of any
related theory of liability, arising out of this license
and/or the use of or inability to use this software, even
if the vendors and/or the publisher have been advised of
the possibility of such damages. Should the software prove
defective, you assume the cost of all necessary servicing,
repair, or correction.

If you think you have a correction for an error in the
software, please submit the correction to www.MindView.net.
(Please use the same process for non-code errors found in
the book.)

If you have a need for permissions not granted above,
please inquire of MindView, Inc., at www.MindView.net or
send a request by email to Bruce@EckelObjects.com.
